

Get app
Write
Sign up
Sign in


Building a Startup Beyond the Hype

Berkeley SkyDeck
Berkeley SkyDeck
5 min read
·
Aug 1, 2023
--



3 Things You Can Do Now as a Founder to Stay Above the Fray
By Chon Tang
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Chon Tang (right, Founding Partner, Berkeley SkyDeck Fund) with judges from M12, Sequoia Capital, Lightspeed, and NEA, at UC Berkeley’s AI Hackathon in June 2023. Photo: Brittany Hosea-Small
I remember my first hype cycle. It feels like just yesterday that I was skipping class at UC Berkeley to hang out in South Park, flipping through every page of the latest Industrial Standard or Red Herring. (Yes — back then our “thought leadership” was delivered printed on dead trees, not instant tweet threads.)
Every article was filled with breathless commentary on the industries ripe for disruption and amazing new innovations covered every page. VCs were worshiped like a modern King Midas — everything they touched turned into gold.
The hype seemed to penetrate each aspect of life. Professors showed up to lectures in fancy new sports cars and whispers spread about “that guy” who just dropped out to become a millionaire. It was a seductive time. Ideas sprouted in every class, the capital markets began to chase (and reward!) every deal, and cafes throughout SoMa filled with hopeful entrepreneurs.
Of course, we all know how that hype cycle ended. As a founder living through the experience, the shock was total and complete — within three months, everything I knew had changed. The heroes we had worshiped just weeks prior collapsed in shame. Fortunes were lost, careers ended, and our best-laid plans disintegrated. Later, as an investor, I had a close eye on similar dynamics at play during the recent crypto hype cycle.
So now, as we sit on the cusp of what many are beginning to call the AI hype cycle, what are the lessons to be learned? As founders, how do you build companies that are immune to the hype and genuinely change the world for the better?
Let me first say — staying on the sidelines isn’t an option. If I could go back in time, even knowing what would inevitably happen with the hype cycle, I would still jump into battle with both feet. The internet in 1999, and AI and LLMs (large language models) in 2023, are transformative technologies that will absolutely disrupt existing industries and rewire society. If you’re driven, if you’re ambitious, if you feel like you were placed on this planet to create something special, then ignore the skeptics. This is an opportunity you have to embrace and here are three tips to help you do so.
1. Ignore the comps
In 1999, the math seemed simple: Company A created $100M in value (at least according to their valuation) just by learning to interact with customers over the internet (or heck, just by appending “.com” to their name). If my idea is 10% better, then I can surely get to $110M, right?
It’s tempting to use the same logic today. If Mistral or Langchain can raise massive rounds a few months after formation, and I find a way to tap into the same story or tailwind, then surely I can get a multiple of the same massive round, right?
Unfortunately, there’s another basic arithmetic principle at play here. In 2000, we learned that if company A ultimately turned out to be worth $0, a multiple of that number is still zero. In other words, don’t let your decisions be guided by what your competitors might be raising. Those comps might have an impact on your valuation, but it has zero impact on your ability to succeed — which leads us to tip number two.
2. Focus on your actual customers
It’s remarkable how so much of the entrepreneurial journey can still be diluted down to this very simple goal. Our peers at YC immortalized this with a simple lesson: “build something people want.”
In venture today, it’s usually the case that you have much more coming into your bank accounts from VC investments than actual customer revenue. By the time a startup gets to $1M in revenue, it is quite possible they’ve raised $3–5mm in seed funding. By the time a startup gets to $5M in ARR, they’re likely raising a $15–30M A.
It’s easy to meet founders who get confused by this dynamic — they begin to treat investors as their actual customers. Their obsession is with satisfying the investor: they religiously study thought leadership pieces, memorize tweet threads from the top investors and spend their dreaming hours plotting the next iteration of their pitch deck.
Alas, VCs happen to amplify those hype cycles — they fall in love with technology, and with a few large term sheets, they can drive the creation of markets where none should actually exist. In other words, when reality hits, the investor “thesis” can disappear overnight. Frankly, the best VCs on the planet are successful by just trying to anticipate and understand customer needs.
So let’s skip VC interest as a signal of anything. Your obsession should be with what your customers are telling you. Their pain point should be your pain point, their success is your success, and their disinterest is your failure. A successful founder is one that educates VCs about what the customers actually want, not the other way around.
3. Pick the right North Star
As you begin to scale your business, you’ll have to start picking the right objective for the team to focus on. Is it GitHub stars? Is it downloads? Is it retention? Or is it actual revenue?
Every startup is different, so there isn’t a simple answer. But understand that for most founders, you’ll get conflicting signals. Your existing investors (many of whom might sit on your board) tend to be capital market focused. As they review your business and plan for the next 6–12 months, there’s a good chance they’re focused on the metrics that supposedly unlock the next investment round.
Alas, those metrics can often be representations of the same mass hallucinations that allowed the hype cycle to build in the first place. Unless you want to bet the entire future of your business on the indefinite amplification of the current hype cycle, then make sure you plan differently.
Of course, fundraising remains an important part of the startup journey, and it makes sense to lock down capital when it’s available, so you can out-build, out-market, and out-spend your competitors. Always make sure, however, that you understand and track the true core metrics that indicate whether customers are embracing your product and whether you’re getting to (or maintaining!) product-market fit.
If you’re exclusively focused on top-line growth because that’s what your investors insisted would be critical for the next round… well, that might be successful during the good years, but if in reality, you’ve been carrying a leaky bucket or poor unit economics, then it all falls apart quickly when the market turns.
At SkyDeck, we spend most of our time focused on building successful startups regardless of where we are in the hype cycle. During the 5 months our companies spend in our program, we’re focused on many of these core tenets: what are the customers telling you about your business?
We know the investors are there. With more than 800 investors joining us for our Demo Days, we know what it takes to get a round successfully completed. So let’s build amazing businesses and everything else will fall into place — in any decade and beyond the hype.
Chon Tang is the Founding Partner of the Berkeley SkyDeck Fund. If you’re interested in learning more about Berkeley SkyDeck or applying, visit: skydeck.berkeley.edu
Startup
Silicon Valley
Technology
Business Development
Accelerator Program
--


Berkeley SkyDeck
Written by Berkeley SkyDeck
82 followers
·
5 following
SkyDeck is a top global accelerator for tech startups.
No responses yet
Help
Status
About
Careers
Press
Blog
Privacy
Rules
Terms
Text to speech